        Groupoids: A Crystallographic Topology Perspective
                        Carroll K. Johnson
           Chemical and Analytical Sciences Division
                Oak Ridge National Laboratory
             Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831-6197, USA

The symmetry of finite objects is often difficult to describe
algebraically without ignoring boundary and truncation effects.  The
230 infinite crystallographic space groups provide suitable
approximation for macroscopic crystals, but are inadequate for
crystals containing only a few unit cells.  Space group theory also
fails to describe a truncated symmetry set such as that of an
asymmetric unit (fundamental domain) within a space group.  One
approach for the asymmetric unit is to topologically wrap it up into
a closed quotient space Euclidean 3-orbifold.  A second approach
involves groupoids which provide algebraic machinery for handling
each of the above incomplete group problems.
                                                                
The first task is to incorporate groupoids into a crystallographic
orbifold nomenclature system using the screw and glide groupoids
introduced by M. A. Jaswon and M. A. Rose in "Crystal Symmetry:
Theory of Colour Crystallography", Horwood, 1983.  Screw and glide
groupoids nomenclature is closely related to that in the
Hermann-Mauguin space group notation, thus providing a possible
method for describing orbifolds in a notation familiar to
crystallographers.  A second task is to translate our Gaussian
measure based Radon Nikodym model for Morse functions on orbifolds,
which we use to describe crystal structure topology, into the
terminology of measured groupoids.



